From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> What's the story that rocked the sports
world? A multi-million dollar betting
scheme that led to more than 30 arrests,
including current and former NBA [music]
players and coaches. Today, we go inside
the federal investigation [music]
into illegal gambling that has rocked
the NBA. You know, this is right out of
a movie. You're talking about [music]
mob stuff. You're talking about cheating
at poker games, rigging poker games. The
alleged schemes involve the mafia,
[music]
high-profile players, and the
manipulation of professional basketball
games to [music] rig and win bets. I
understand betting is legal, but I I I
don't think it's too much to ask of a
player or a coach do not engage in this.
For me, it's all about trust. People
[music] watch this game because they
think it's real and fair. And I'm just
ashamed that they put themselves and put
their family and put the NBA in this
position. And there's old saying in the
hood, all money ain't good money. I
talked to my [music] colleagues, Jonah
Bromwich and Jenny Vrentas, about the
shocking facts [music] of the cases and
the growing concern that the explosion
of online betting [music] may be
compromising the integrity of the sport.
It's [music] Monday, October 27th.
Jonah, the NBA season started last week.
Tons of storylines there. Huge week for
the league. But, the biggest story at
this moment for the NBA had nothing to
do with the games. It was this massive
announcement made by the FBI director,
Cash Patel, on Thursday. So, walk me
through exactly what he said. Sure. So,
6:30 in the morning, we get this email.
There's going to be this big
announcement, and no one really knows
what it is beforehand. We're getting
kind of bits and pieces of it. But then,
people go into the room.
Good morning.
And Cash Patel is there, and he starts
talking about these two enormously
consequential
schemes.
Today, we are here in New York to
announce a historic arrest across a
wide-sweeping criminal enterprise that
envelops both the NBA and La Cosa
Nostra. So, the first case is the poker
case. And that is about a very
complicated mafia-involved scheme to rig
poker games, and prominent NBA figures
were used almost as bait to attract the
victims to these games.
There is no room for any type of
criminal behavior, be it on the world's
largest stage
or in the backrooms of tiny parlors
where guard games are being plugged. And
then, the second one intrudes more
closely on the life of the league
because this is
one player, various other
co-conspirators,
>> [music]
>> making bets about what's going to happen
in games based on their relationships
inside the locker room.
It's not hundreds of dollars. It's not
thousands of dollars. It's not tens of
thousands of dollars. And what is
immediately clear in what he's talking
about [music] is that the scope of this
is enormous.
We're talking about tens of millions of
dollars in fraud [music] and theft and
robbery.
>> it hits the league in a place that the
league really doesn't want to be hit.
And look, let's not, you know, mince
words. This is the insider trading saga
for the NBA.
>> [music]
>> Okay, let's take these schemes one by
one, and we'll start with the illegal
rigged poker games.
How did this work? Who was there? What
happened? I want to know everything.
So, what I'm about to describe, they
haven't been proven, and I'm largely
drawing on indictments from prosecutors.
So, defense lawyers have not yet had a
say.
It's not clear what they'll argue, and
all these are just allegations for the
moment. Mhm. So, this is a kind of
remarkable story in its own right
because this is a story about pretty
high-tech rigging of illegal poker
games. They were held regularly at two
locations in New York. And what would
happen is
using two NBA figures as bait, the many,
many people involved in this scheme
would have victims come to these games,
and they would use these advanced
shuffling machines that could tell them
which of them had the best hand, and
coordinate with that knowledge to win
this game and defraud victims of their
money. And who's running these poker
games? Like, who's everyone behind all
this? So, the mafia is is largely behind
all this. There's four different mafia
families. They're Bonannos, the
Gambinos, the Genoveses, and the
Luccheses that are involved in poker
games, and it does bring up this kind of
image of Tony Soprano and then games
from that show. But, this is really
still happening. You know, the the mafia
still exists in New York. And one of the
things they do, one of the ways they
make money, is by getting these
operations off the street, out of the
public eye, and at the poker table.
Okay, so you have this kind of old world
aspect of this where the mafia is
involved, but it sounds like it was kind
of high-tech. You mentioned these
advanced shuffling machines. Like, the
mechanism by which the cheating happens,
it was pretty technological. Yeah, and
there are a lot of kind of crazy
technologies involved in this. They're
all these kind of almost like James
Bond-like gadgets mixed in with this
mafia movie that we're hearing about.
They had [music] decoy cell phones that
could detect which cards were on the
table at which time. They had playing
cards that had these kind of invisible
ink markings that you would had to wear
special contact lenses to see. What? And
the rigged shuffling machines you
mentioned, it's funny, they're not
rigged in the way that they shuffle.
>> [music]
>> What they can do is analyze, as they're
dealing a hand, the strength of that
hand relative to every other hand
they've dealt. [music]
So, the shuffling is above board, but
what happens is that the machine sends a
signal to an outside person known as the
operator. The operator then sends that
information back into the room to the
person they call the quarterback or the
driver, and everyone on the cheating
team knows, okay, we're going to
coordinate this knowing who has the best
hand here.
Can I ask how much money were these
games raking in? I think I'm used to the
idea of like a $25 poker night. So, just
lay out for me what amount is being
stolen in this kind of cheating? Like, a
truly absurd amount. An amount that
really kind of makes us curious about
who exactly is playing at these games.
Mhm. So, for example, John Doe number
one is named in the indictment. That's
the first victim. John Doe number one
loses $1.8 million
in a single game. And so, overall, we're
talking about millions and millions of
dollars at these games, which are held
regularly both in the New York locations
I mentioned, but also all over the
United States, the indictment says.
And you said that the NBA players
involved, they were used as a draw for
the other marks that came. They made the
games cool. So, the implication is that
they were getting a cut of the winnings?
Like, were they in business with the
mafia? They're directly accused of
getting a cut of the winnings. So, yes,
exactly. They are accused of doing
business with the mafia. One of whom is
quite well known to NBA fans, Chauncey
Billups, NBA champion, current head
coach for the Portland Trail Blazers.
Yep. And the collection of guys at this
table is really fascinating, right? Cuz
it's
mafia members, and then it's these
almost sports betting nerds who love
poker. So, just imagine that game.
Imagine the personalities that half the
the side is cheating. It's just an
extraordinary scene to think about.
Okay, I want to turn to the other
indictment. Cash Patel called this one
insider trading for the NBA.
Is that accurate? What are we talking
about here?
So, this is a scheme where, according to
the indictment, a NBA player and
co-conspirators traded on information
known only to them, known only to people
who would be inside the locker room, and
they used it to gamble on games with an
advantage that no one else had. And
that's exactly how insider trading
works. You have information that is not
available to the public, and you use
that information to your financial
advantage. So, it's actually a perfect
explanation of what happened here. Tell
me a little bit more about how they used
it to their advantage. Like,
specifically in this case, what were
they doing? How did they make money?
So, there are a couple different ways
that they used the information that they
had access to. And the first example is
the most outrageous, and I think maybe
the most troubling for the NBA. So, the
one active NBA player who is a defendant
here is a guy named Terry Rozier. Terry
Rozier, he's currently a guard on the
Miami Heat, but in 2023, he was a player
for the Charlotte Hornets.
And while playing for the Hornets, told
his co-conspirators, "Hey, I'm going to
go out of this game early with an
injury, and no one knows that I'm going
to do that, including officials on my
own team." So, knowing that Rozier was
going to go out of this game early was
an enormous advantage, and it was an
advantage because his co-conspirators
then bet that he would score fewer
points, that he would be less productive
in this game than he usually was. And of
course, they were right because when he
went out early, there was no chance that
he was going to make up those averages,
and they were able to win hundreds of
thousands of dollars. So, what you're
talking about, those bets on how many
points he's going to score at a certain
point in the game, those are what's been
referred to as prop bets. Can you just
break down what prop bets are? Yeah, so
I think when people who do not gamble on
sports consider sports betting, when
they consider it at all, they might
think that the easiest way to do it is
you're going to bet on who wins and who
loses. But sports gambling has gotten a
lot more sophisticated and you can bet
on all these different kinds of elements
of a game, including
an individual player's performance, an
individual player's performance in a
certain category like points scored,
rebounds. The amount of betting
categories has become really vast and
that's important here because it shows
you that just Terry Rozier, one person
on a team of at least 11 basketball
players, can actively impact betting
even if he can't ultimately control the
outcome of a game.
And that's what's at issue here, not
just with Rozier, right? The idea is
that the information that was being
traded was used to manipulate bets on
individual events like this. Yeah,
that's exactly right and I'll give you
another example and this one is
eyebrow-raising not because it involves
the kind of obvious flagrant violation
that Rozier is accused of, but because
of the name it does involve. So, the
other NBA figure involved in this scheme
is a guy named Damon Jones and in
February 2023 he was an unofficial
assistant coach for the Los Angeles
Lakers.
While he was in that role, he got
information that a prominent player,
according to the indictment, named
player three, was not going to play in a
game.
Jones then quickly spread that
information to his co-conspirators. They
just bet on the Lakers losing that game
and the description of player three in
the indictment perfectly matches LeBron
James. Now, LeBron is not accused of any
wrongdoing, he's not even implicated,
but you can see why this is such a huge
problem for the NBA because even the
specter of the possibility that a scheme
like this touched on their most
marketable star, the face of their sport
for more than a decade, hints at the
issues when the integrity of an NBA game
begins to be called into question.
Jonah, you've covered really big cases
for us, including Trump trials, Letitia
James arraignment.
Where does this rank for you in the
pantheon of all of the cases you've been
looking at? How earth-shattering does it
feel? Yeah, in terms of the scale and
high-profile nature of what I often
cover, it doesn't quite touch those
things, but criminal cases always in
some way touch on what's going on in
society. Like that seems like a silly
thing to say, but it's actually what
makes it so interesting.
There's all this legality, there's all
these specifics of these indictments,
but it always touches back with
something that's going on in the broader
world and I just see that this case,
[music] like the other cases that I've
covered, really speaks to something
that's going on in the moment, in this
case exactly what's going on in sports
gambling [music] and why it poses such a
problem for these leagues in 2025.
Well, Jonah, thank you so [music] much.
Of course, thank you for having me.
After the break, I'll talk to my
colleague Jenny Vrentas about exactly
that, [music] how the proliferation of
sports betting may contribute to
scandals like this and the impact that
it's had on our culture.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Jenny, we are here to talk to you about
the sports betting indictment. That just
seems like it has really huge
implications, definitely for the NBA and
maybe for sports in general. And in many
ways, it does seem as though sports
betting has proliferated in recent
years, especially these prop bets that
are central to this indictment. And this
is a question that I think a lot of
people have been asking, what effect
will it have on the integrity of the
game?
You've been covering this world for a
very long time, so let me just ask you,
do you think that the explosion of
online sports betting enabled the
criminal conspiracy that was just
revealed? I think it creates conditions
in which gambling is more normalized,
more part of society and there are more
chances for criminal activity.
Obviously, these crimes are still in the
stage where the people have been accused
and the crimes haven't been adjudicated,
but I do think what we're seeing now
with this situation is this is what
sports leagues didn't want to happen.
This is what fans didn't want to happen.
And now that it's happened, okay, it's
one case, but it involves a lot of
people, it involves multiple players,
coaches sharing information on multiple
teams, on multiple games. And so I do
think it's fair for fans and anyone who
loves sports in the United States to
wonder, is this just the tip of the
iceberg? Okay, I want to get to the
question that you raised about whether
this is possibly way more widespread
than we even know,
but just to slow down and pause for a
moment, can we walk through exactly what
this embrace of sports betting has
looked like from the perspective of the
leagues, fans and the players
themselves?
Absolutely. It wasn't that long ago that
sports leagues were opposed to the
legalization of sports betting in the
United States. However, in 2018 the
Supreme Court overturned a law that
effectively banned sports betting in
most of the country and as a
consequence, there were significant
business opportunities that came from
that that sports leagues wanted to take
advantage of.
>> [music]
>> So they built partnerships with sports
books. You want to make every game
interesting? Step one, open the BetMGM
sports book. Step two, put some skin in
the game. And step three,
showtime.
There are licensing deals. New arena?
How about a new network? Welcome to
FanDuel Sports Network, your home for
Clippers basketball. There are signage
all over stadiums.
>> [music]
>> Some stadiums have sports books inside
of them. You can even bet on games while
they're still being played.
Seriously.
>> [music]
>> During TV broadcast, there are prompts
to bet during the game. Now you're in
the ring with the king of sports books.
You know what to do. How quickly this
has changed in the last seven years is
dizzying. I'm a person that has followed
sports, covered sports for a long time
and even I am surprised by how quickly
betting has become embedded into how we
consume sports.
Yeah, I should probably at this point
come out as a huge sports fan myself.
I've also been shocked at just how much
all of this is plastered everywhere, how
unavoidable it is at halftime, at the
games, it's everywhere.
I think one of the things I didn't
understand though was these smaller prop
bets and how important they are to this
new infrastructure, to this new
industry. Yes, absolutely. The volume
and types of bets has exploded
exponentially over the last few years
and I think as a consequence of that,
you are presenting more opportunities
for individual occurrences in the game
to potentially be manipulated because
it's very hard to fix a game. You need
cooperation of the entire team, you
can't control everything that happens in
a game, but what you can do is you can
control in some level your individual
performance or the outcome of a single
period of time or a single
part of your game. Right, like if you're
a pitcher, obviously you can control the
kind of pitch you throw. If you're a
point guard, you can decide who gets the
ball at any point. I'm wondering if you
can walk me through the engagement
aspect of this. Like what does it do to
a fan experience and to the overall
watching experience if people are
betting on each of these individual
outcomes? Right, exactly and I think
that's a huge piece of this conversation
because this is part of the reason that
leagues have embraced sports betting
because they believe that if people are
betting on games and during games, that
they will watch more games for longer
periods of time. And we've also seen
with this increase in these bets that
come during a game sort of keep people
watching and keep people interested in a
game maybe you would have no interest in
watching otherwise and that all feeds
into fan engagement. The more eyes that
are on games, then the price of the
media rights deals, which are the
largest source of profit for the NBA and
the NFL, that goes up and so there you
see why there has been this push of more
betting opportunities throughout games.
Let's talk about the league's economic
interests here. What has embracing
sports betting done for their bottom
line? Yeah, I mean sports betting has
been a huge financial boon for sports
leagues. I mean they have partnerships
with sports betting operators that net
something around hundreds of millions of
dollars a year. They have stakes in
these data companies that sell
statistics from sports games to sports
books, which are used to create some of
these prop bets for instance. And so
it's become this ecosystem where sports
betting is so embedded in the business
interests of the leagues that it would
be hard to back out at this point.
>> They're just totally enmeshed. They're
totally enmeshed, absolutely.
To just return to the conspiracy that
has been laid out in this indictment, I
can see a world in which people might
look at what's happened and say, look,
actually the rise of online sports
betting, it allows you to track more
easily unusual bets and therefore it's
not the rise of online sports betting
that enabled this. This is just gambling
and actually we're in a position where
where we can catch this more easily. But
on the other hand, it does seem as
though from what you're saying, it's
just become so much easier to bet on
every little tiny thing. It like it's
hard to imagine finding a bookie back in
the day who's willing to take a bet on
whether someone is going to hit a three
in the last two minutes of the third
quarter. And so there's a world in which
the proliferation itself
does pave the way for a scandal like
this. Yeah, I think it's sort of a both
things are true situation here and that
it is true that sports books and sports
leagues work with integrity monitors
that are catching suspicious betting
activity and that those integrity
monitors played a role in spotting this
scandal. But I think the point that
you're making which I think is a true
one is that when you have this world in
which you can bet on so many things
through the course of a game you have to
consider the fact that there are more
chances for manipulation and it makes it
harder to catch when there are so many
more opportunities. Let's talk about the
options for the NBA right now because
the incentives are kind of interesting.
On the one hand, you can see how they'd
be worried if people start to en masse
doubt that what they're seeing on the
court is real.
On the other hand, as you've said, this
is just a huge business for them. I
think the interesting thing is that game
integrity is actually something that all
of the stakeholders care about. The
sports books care about it, the leagues
care about it, the better care about it.
If fans start to believe that betting is
an influence for players on the court or
coaches of teams to start manipulating
games, it really does undercut the trust
and the experience that fans have when
they watch. What I do think is a
potential landing spot here is for
sports leagues to come together and say
we are going to limit or ban prop bets.
However, on the sports book side, prop
bets are a big part of their business. I
mean one estimate that I received would
be if you limited prop bets, you would
potentially be reducing the amount that
people bet by around 20%. That's
significant for sports books in their
business and so this could be an area
where you see what is now a shared
business interest colliding a little
bit.
Okay, so we've talked about the
implications for the league, for the
fans. I want to ask about the players
because watching this all unfold, it
made me think that you know, they're at
risk from this too. It raises the
possibility that suddenly the players
will be under more suspicion, right?
That especially if they aren't doing
well, if they're injured or even if they
just miss a couple shots, that people
might think they're setting up a bet.
Yeah, I think that's a really great
question and I'm glad you raised it.
We've seen that players, you know,
they'll get harassing messages from
angry bettors who a bet didn't go their
way. A lot of players have started to
speak out about this. I think there's
another element here too, which is the
pressure from people around you to get
inside information from you and what we
saw in the federal indictments is there
were several cases in which people in
somebody's entourage or a childhood
friend or a trainer was sharing
information about the players and I
think where you could see the pressure
being the hardest to navigate is for
people who aren't paid millions of
dollars, you know, for college athletes
or people in lower tier pro leagues who
might be getting pressure from people
for inside information and maybe the
money feels worth it to them. So I do
think there are a lot of consequences
for the players dealing with how much
sports gambling has become part of the
sports world that they're in and I think
you know, they haven't had any input
into that. I mean this is the world that
they're playing in, right?
>> Right, this has been totally foisted on
them and they have to deal with the
consequences, it sounds like. Exactly.
You mentioned this earlier and I want to
just come back to it. How worried are
fans, are experts, are you that this
could be more widespread than just this
one scandal? You know, that this could
be in many different sports. There's a
world in which it sort of seems like you
kind of have to be worried about that,
wondering whether anything you're
watching in any one of these leagues
could be manipulated at any moment. I
think it's fair for any of us to ponder
that and I think once you start to
ponder that, then the cracks begin.
>> [music]
>> Even in just this federal indictment,
right? There were multiple teams,
multiple games, multiple years, players,
coaches. There were a lot of
parts of the NBA affected by this and I
think it's come up enough times that it
is a persistent concern that the leagues
are going to have to confront and
American [music] sports fans are going
to have to reckon with more and more.
>> [music]
>> Well, Jenny, thanks so much. Thank you
for having me.
>> [music]
>> Since the indictments were announced,
the House Committee on Energy and
Commerce has requested a briefing on the
scandal from NBA Commissioner Adam
Silver by this Friday, October 31st.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you should know today.
On Sunday, Chinese and American
officials [music] said they'd agreed to
a framework of a trade deal ahead of a
meeting planned between President Trump
and China's [music] top leader Xi
Jinping later this week. Trade
negotiators for the two sides met in
Malaysia. An official said they
discussed a range of issues including
Chinese restrictions [music]
on rare earth minerals, port fees that
the US recently slapped on Chinese ships
>> [music]
>> and an extension of a truce on tariffs.
The details of the framework remain
unclear.
>> [music]
>> The Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent
said on ABC that he expected China to
delay [music] global export controls on
rare earths and that the US threat of
imposing 100% tariffs on China would be
averted.
>> [music]
>> And the French police made arrests in
the brazen [music] jewelry heist last
week at the Louvre, though the
authorities didn't say how many people
were taken into custody. The Paris
prosecutor said in [music] a statement
that one man was taken into custody at
Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris as he
was trying to leave the country. [music]
It was not immediately clear whether the
police had recovered any of the stolen
jewelry which includes gem-studded royal
tiaras,
necklaces, [music]
and earrings dating back to the 19th
century.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Shannon Lynn, Anna Foley, and Diana
Wynn.
It was edited [music] by Brennan
Klinkenberg, Lexy Dio, and Mike Benoît.
Contains original music [music] by Dan
Powell, Alicia Betub, and Marion Lozano.
And was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]